it is tens of thousands of times more
powerful than a human nose able to sniff
out the most subtle of sense and in
Simba's case it can be a lifesaver Simba
in his owner Carolyn who's diabetic have
a bond beyond the ordinary by
recognizing odor changes Simba's been
trained to recognize when the Carolyn's
blood sugar levels are dangerously high
or too low he'll either bring my blood
kit to me so instantly honor but if a
moutain a bow he'll jump up at me and
lick my face and then I know that have
to take me Bloods and the dogs powerful
senses are being tapped into in other
ways most of the time these dogs live at
home with their owners but they're also
helping researchers detect serious
diseases here a carousel is loaded with
urine samples one contains that of a
patient who's known to have prostate
cancer
Daisy sense of smell is extremely strong
time after time she's able to pick out
the right sample but it's still unclear
how she's managing to do it it's thought
through training the dogs are able to
identify odors associated with cancer
researchers hope this method could help
diagnose cancers in their early stages
avoiding some other invasive methods of
screening what we're looking at is is
ways of screening for cancer there are
cheap and non-invasive and reliable and
currently all our indications are that
the dogs could provide this very thing
so once we've got that evidence that we
can screen thousands of samples reliably
with a reliability of a high high
accuracy then we would then be able to
offer something tangible to the medical
profession and more research will be
carried out for centuries dogs have
provided comfort and companionship now
their most powerful tool could pave the
way to save more lives
Emma Haywood al Jazeera near Milton
Keynes